

Dear SIR,

I have had inexpressible Pleasure in the Perusal of your PAMELA. It
intirely answers the Character you give of it in your Preface; nor have
you said one Word too much in Commendation of a Piece that has
Advantages and Excellencies peculiar to itself. For, besides the
beautiful Simplicity of the Style, and a happy Propriety and Clearness
of Expression (the Letters being written under the immediate Impression
of every Circumstance which occasioned them, and that to those who had a
Right to know the fair Writer's most secret Thoughts) the several
Passions of the Mind must, of course, be more affectingly described, and
Nature may be traced in her undisguised Inclinations with much more
Propriety and Exactness, than can possibly be found in a Detail of
Actions long past, which are never recollected with the same Affections,
Hopes, and Dreads, with which they were felt when they occurred.

This little Book will infallibly be looked upon as the hitherto
much-wanted Standard or Pattern for this Kind of Writing. For it abounds
with lively Images and Pictures; with Incidents natural, surprising, and
perfectly adapted to the Story; with Circumstances interesting to
Persons in common Life, as well as to those in exalted Stations. The
greatest Regard is every where paid in it to Decency, and to every Duty
of Life: There is a constant Fitness of the Style to the Persons and
Characters described; Pleasure and Instruction here always go hand in
hand: Vice and Virtue are set in constant Opposition, and Religion
every-where inculcated in its native Beauty and chearful Amiableness;
not dressed up in stiff, melancholy, or gloomy Forms, on one hand, nor
yet, on the other, debased below its due Dignity and noble Requisites,
in Compliment to a too fashionable but depraved Taste. And this I will
boldly say, that if its numerous Beauties are added to its excellent
Tendency, it will be found worthy a Place, not only in all Families
(especially such as have in them young Persons of either Sex) but in the
Collections of the most curious and polite Readers. For, as it borrows
none of its Excellencies from the romantic Flights of unnatural Fancy,
its being founded in Truth and Nature, and built upon Experience, will
be a lasting Recommendation to the Discerning and Judicious; while the
agreeable Variety of Occurrences and Characters, in which it abounds,
will not fail to engage the Attention of the gay and more sprightly
Readers.

The moral Reflections and Uses to be drawn from the several Parts of
this admirable History, are so happily deduced from a Croud of different
Events and Characters, in the Conclusion of the Work, that I shall say
the less on that Head. But I think, the Hints you have given me, should
also prefatorily be given to the Publick; viz. That it will appear
from several Things mentioned in the Letters, that the Story must have
happened within these Thirty Years past: That you have been obliged to
vary some of the Names of Persons, Places, &c. and to disguise a few
of the Circumstances, in order to avoid giving Offence to some Persons,
who would not chuse to be pointed out too plainly in it; tho' they would
be glad it may do the Good so laudably intended by the Publication. And
as you have in Confidence submitted to my Opinion some of those
Variations, I am much pleased that you have so managed the Matter, as to
make no Alteration in the Facts; and, at the same time, have avoided the
digressive Prolixity too frequently used on such Occasions.


Little Book, charming PAMELA! face the World, and never doubt of finding
Friends and Admirers, not only in thine own Country, but far from Home;
[del. 8th] {where thou mayst give an Example of Purity to the Writers
of a neighbouring Nation; which now shall have an Opportunity to receive
English Bullion in Exchange for its own Dross, which has so long
passed current among us in Pieces abounding with all the Levities of its
volatile Inhabitants.} The reigning Depravity of the Times has yet left
Virtue many Votaries. Of their Protection you need not despair. May
every head-strong Libertine whose Hands you reach, be reclaimed; and
every tempted Virgin who reads you, imitate the Virtue, and meet the
Reward of the high-meriting, tho' low-descended, PAMELA. I am, Sir,

  Your most Obedient,
    and Faithful Servant,

      J. B. D. F.




To my worthy Friend, the Editor of PAMELA.

SIR,

I return the Manuscript of Pamela by the Bearer, which I have read
with a great deal of Pleasure. It is written with that Spirit of Truth
and agreeable Simplicity, which, tho' much wanted, is seldom found in
those Pieces which are calculated for the Entertainment and Instruction
of the Publick. It carries Conviction in every Part of it; and the
Incidents are so natural and interesting, that I have gone hand-in-hand,
and sympathiz'd with the pretty Heroine in all her Sufferings, and been
extremely anxious for her Safety, under the Apprehensions of the bad
Consequences which I expected, every Page, would ensue from the laudable
Resistance she made. I have interested myself in all her Schemes of
Escape; been alternately pleas'd and angry with her in her Restraint;
pleas'd with the little Machinations and Contrivances she set on foot
for her Release, and angry for suffering her Fears to defeat them;
always lamenting, with a most sensible Concern, the Miscarriages of her
Hopes and Projects. In short, the whole is so affecting, that there is
no reading it without uncommon Concern and Emotion. Thus far only as to
the Entertainment it gives.

As to Instruction and Morality, the Piece is full of both. It shews
Virtue in the strongest Light, and renders the Practice of it amiable
and lovely. The beautiful Sufferer keeps it ever in her View, without
the least Ostentation, or Pride; she has it so strongly implanted in
her, that thro' the whole Course of her Sufferings, she does not so much
as hesitate once, whether she shall sacrifice it to Liberty and
Ambition, or not; but, as if there were no other way to free and save
herself, carries on a determin'd Purpose to persevere in her Innocence,
and wade with it throughout all Difficulties and Temptations, or perish
under them. [del. 8th] {It is an astonishing Matter, and well worth
our most serious Consideration, that a young beautiful Girl, in the low
Scene of Life and Circumstance in which Fortune placed her, without the
Advantage of a Friend capable to relieve and protect her, or any other
Education than what occurr'd to her from her own Observation and little
Reading, in the Course of her Attendance on her excellent Mistress and
Benefactress, could, after having a Taste of Ease and Plenty in a higher
Sphere of Life than what she was born and first brought up in, resolve
to return to her primitive Poverty, rather than give up her Innocence.}
I say, it is surprising, that a young Person, so circumstanced, could,
in Contempt of proffer'd Grandeur on the one side, and in Defiance of
Penury on the other, so happily and prudently conduct herself thro' such
a Series of Perplexities and Troubles, and withstand the alluring Baits,
and almost irresistible Offers of a fine Gentleman, so universally
admired and esteemed, for the Agreeableness of his Person and good
Qualities, among all his Acquaintance; defeat all his Measures with so
much Address, and oblige him, at last, to give over his vain Pursuit,
and sacrifice his Pride and Ambition to Virtue, and become the Protector
of that Innocence which he so long and so indefatigably labour'd to
supplant: And all this without ever having entertain'd the least
previous Design or Thought for that Purpose: No Art used to inflame him,
no Coquetry practised to tempt or intice him, and no Prudery or
Affectation to tamper with his Passions; but, on the contrary, artless
and unpractised in the Wiles of the World, all her Endeavours, and even
all her Wishes, tended only to render herself as un-amiable as she could
in his Eyes: Tho' at the same time she is so far from having any
Aversion to his Person, that she seems rather prepossess'd in his
Favour, and admires his Excellencies, whilst she condemns his Passion
for her. A glorious Instance of Self-denial! Thus her very Repulses
became Attractions: The more she resisted, the more she charm'd; and the
very Means she used to guard her Virtue, the more endanger'd it, by
inflaming his Passions: Till, at last, by Perseverance, and a brave and
resolute Defence, the Besieged not only obtain'd a glorious Victory over
the Besieger, but took him Prisoner too.

I am charmed with the beautiful Reflections she makes in the Course of
her Distresses; her Soliloquies and little Reasonings with herself, are
exceeding pretty and entertaining: She pours out all her Soul in them
before her Parents without Disguise; so that one may judge of, nay,
almost see, the inmost Recesses of her Mind. A pure clear Fountain of
Truth and Innocence; a Magazine of Virtue and unblemish'd Thoughts!

I can't conceive why you should hesitate a Moment as to the Publication
of this very natural and uncommon Piece. I could wish to see it out in
its own native Simplicity, which will affect and please the Reader
beyond all the Strokes of Oratory in the World; for those will but spoil
it: and, should you permit such a murdering Hand to be laid upon it, to
gloss and tinge it over with superfluous and needless Decorations,
which, like too much Drapery in Sculpture and Statuary, will but
encumber it; it may disguise the Facts, mar the Reflections, and
unnaturalize the Incidents, so as to be lost in a Multiplicity of fine
idle Words and Phrases, and reduce our Sterling Substance into an empty
Shadow, or rather frenchify our English Solidity into Froth and
Whip-syllabub. No; let us have Pamela as Pamela wrote it; in her own
Words, without Amputation, or Addition. Produce her to us in her neat
Country Apparel, such as she appear'd in, on her intended Departure to
her Parents; for such best becomes her Innocence, and beautiful
Simplicity. Such a Dress will best edify and entertain. The flowing
Robes of Oratory may indeed amuse and amaze, but will never strike the
Mind with solid Attention.

In short, Sir, a Piece of this Kind is much wanted in the World, which
is but too much, as well as too early, debauched by pernicious Novels.
I know nothing Entertaining of that Kind that one might venture to
recommend to the Perusal (much less the Imitation) of the Youth of
either Sex: All that I have hitherto read, tends only to corrupt their
Principles, mislead their Judgments, and initiate them into Gallantry,
and loose Pleasures.

Publish then, this good, this edifying and instructive little Piece for
their sakes. The Honour of Pamela's Sex demands Pamela at your
Hands, to shew the World an Heroine, almost beyond Example, in an
unusual Scene of Life, whom no Temptations, or Sufferings, could subdue.
It is a fine, and glorious Original, for the Fair to copy out and
imitate. Our own Sex, too, require it of you, to free us, in some
measure, from the Imputation of being incapable of the Impressions of
Virtue and Honour; [del. 8th] {and to shew the Ladies, that we are not
inflexible while they are so.}

In short, the Cause of Virtue calls for the Publication of such a Piece
as this. Oblige then, Sir, the concurrent Voices of both Sexes, and give
us Pamela for the Benefit of Mankind: [del. 8th] {And as I believe
its Excellencies cannot be long unknown to the World, and that there
will not be a Family without it; so I make no Doubt but every Family
that has it, will be much improv'd and better'd by it.} 'Twill form the
tender Minds of Youth for the Reception and Practice of Virtue and
Honour; confirm and establish those of maturer Years on good and
steady Principles; reclaim the Vicious, and mend the Age in general;
insomuch that as I doubt not Pamela will become the bright Example and
Imitation of all the fashionable young Ladies of Great Britain; so the
truly generous Benefactor and Rewarder of her exemplary Virtue, will be
no less admired and imitated among the Beau Monde of our own Sex. I am

  Your affectionate Friend, &c.




INTRODUCTION

TO THIS

SECOND EDITION.


The kind Reception which this Piece has met with from the Publick,
[del. 4th] {(a large Impression having been carried off in less than
Three Months)} deserves not only Acknowlegdment, but that some Notice
should be taken of the Objections that have hitherto come to hand
against a few Passages in it, [del. 5th] {that so the Work may be
rendered as unexceptionable as possible, and, of consequence, the fitter
to answer the general Design of it; which is to promote Virtue, and
cultivate the Minds of the Youth of both Sexes.}

[5th, change 2.] {But Difficulties having arisen from the different
Opinions of Gentlemen, some of whom applauded the very Things that
others found Fault with, it was thought proper to submit the Whole to
the Judgment of a Gentleman of the most distinguish'd Taste and
Abilities; the Result of which will be seen in the subsequent Pages.}

[del. 5th] {We begin with the following Letter, at the Desire of
several Gentlemen, to whom, on a very particular Occasion, it was
communicated, and who wish'd to see it prefixed to the New Edition. It
was directed,}


To the Editor of PAMELA.

Dear Sir,

You have agreeably deceiv'd me into a Surprize, which it will be as hard
to express, as the Beauties of PAMELA. Though I open'd this powerful
little Piece with more Expectation than from common Designs, of like
Promise, because it came from your Hands, for my Daughters, yet, who
could have dreamt, he should find, under the modest Disguise of a
Novel, all the Soul of Religion, Good-breeding, Discretion,
Good-nature, Wit, Fancy, Fine Thought, and Morality?---I have done
nothing but read it to others, and hear others again read it, to me,
ever since it came into my Hands; and I find I am likely to do nothing
else, for I know not how long yet to come: because, if I lay the Book
down, it comes after me.----When it has dwelt all Day long upon the Ear,
It takes Possession, all Night, of the Fancy.----It has Witchcraft in
every Page of it: but it is the Witchcraft of Passion and Meaning. Who
is there that will not despise the false, empty Pomp of the Poets,
when he observes in this little, unpretending, mild Triumph of Nature,
the whole Force of Invention and Genius, creating new Powers of Emotion,
and transplanting Ideas of Pleasure into that unweeded low Garden
the Heart, from the dry and sharp Summit of Reason?

Yet, I confess, there is One, in the World, of whom I think with still
greater Respect, than of PAMELA: and That is, of the [del. 5th]
{wonderful} AUTHOR of PAMELA.----Pray, Who is he, Dear Sir? and where,
and how, has he been able to hide, hitherto, such an encircling and
all-mastering Spirit? He possesses every Quality that ART could have
charm'd by: yet, has lent it to, and conceal'd it in, NATURE.----The
Comprehensiveness of his Imagination must be truly prodigious!----It has
stretch'd out this diminutive mere Grain of Mustard-seed, (a poor
Girl's little, innocent, Story) into a Resemblance of That Heaven,
which the Best of Good Books has compar'd it to.----All the Passions are
His, in their most close and abstracted Recesses: and by selecting the
most delicate, and yet, at the same time, most powerful, of their
Springs, thereby to act, wind, and manage, the Heart, He moves us,
every where, with the Force of a TRAGEDY.

What is there, throughout the Whole, that I do not sincerely
admire!---I admire, in it, the strong distinguish'd Variety, and
picturesque glowing Likeness to Life, of the Characters. I know, hear,
see, and live among 'em All: and, if I cou'd paint, cou'd return you
their Faces. I admire, in it, the noble Simplicity, Force, Aptness,
and Truth, of so many modest, oeconomical, moral, prudential, religious,
satirical, and cautionary, Lessons; which are introduc'd with such
seasonable Dexterity, and with so polish'd and exquisite a Delicacy, of
Expression and Sentiment, that I am only apprehensive, for the
Interests of Virtue, lest some of the finest, and most touching,
of those elegant Strokes of Good-breeding, Generosity, and Reflection,
shou'd be lost, under the too gross Discernment of an unfeeling Majority
of Readers; for whose Coarseness, however, they were kindly design'd, as
the most useful and charitable Correctives.

One of the best-judg'd Peculiars, of the Plan, is, that These
Instructions being convey'd, as in a Kind of Dramatical Representation,
by those beautiful Scenes, Her own Letters and Journals, who acts the
most moving and suffering Part, we feel the Force in a threefold
Effect,----from the Motive, the Act, and the Consequence.

But what, above All, I am charm'd with, is the amiable Good-nature of
the AUTHOR; who, I am convinc'd, has one of the best, and most generous
Hearts, of Mankind: because, mis-measuring other Minds, by His Own,
he can draw Every thing, to Perfection, but Wickedness.----I became
inextricably in Love with this delightful Defect of his Malice;--for,
I found it owing to an Excess in his Honesty. Only observe, Sir,
with what virtuous Reluctance he complies with the Demands of his
Story, when he stands in need of some blameable Characters. Tho' his
Judgment compels him to mark 'em with disagreeable Colourings, so that
they make an odious Appearance at first, He can't forbear, by an
unexpected and gradual Decline from Themselves, to soften and transmute
all the Horror conceiv'd for their Baseness, till we are arriv'd,
through insensible Stages, at an Inclination to forgive it intirely.

I must venture to add, without mincing the matter, what I really
believe, of this Book.---It will live on, through Posterity, with such
unbounded Extent of Good Consequences, that Twenty Ages to come may be
the Better and Wiser, for its Influence. It will steal first,
imperceptibly, into the Hearts of the Young and the Tender: where It
will afterwards guide and moderate their Reflections and Resolves, when
grown Older. And so, a gradual moral Sunshine, of un-austere and
compassionate Virtue, shall break out upon the World, from this
TRIFLE (for such, I dare answer for the Author, His Modesty misguides
him to think it).----No Applause therefore can be too high, for such
Merit. And, let me abominate the contemptible Reserves of
mean-spirited Men, who while they but hesitate their Esteem, with
Restraint, can be fluent and uncheck'd in their Envy.----In an Age so
deficient in Goodness, Every such Virtue, as That of this Author, is a
salutary Angel, in Sodom. And One who cou'd stoop to conceal,
a Delight he receives from the Worthy, wou'd be equally capable of
submitting to an Approbation of the Praise of the Wicked.

I was thinking, just now, as I return'd from a Walk in the Snow, on
that Old Roman Policy, of Exemptions in Favour of Men, who had given a
few, bodily, Children to the Republick.----What superior Distinction
ought our Country, to find [del. 8th] {(but that Policy and We are
at Variance)} for Reward of this Father, of Millions of MINDS, which
are to owe new Formation to the future Effect of his Influence!

Upon the whole, as I never met with so pleasing, so honest, and so truly
deserving a Book, I shou'd never have done, if I explain'd All my
Reasons for admiring its Author.----If it is not a Secret, oblige me
so far as to tell me his Name: for since I feel him the Friend of
my Soul, it would be a Kind of Violation to retain him a
Stranger.----I am not able to thank you enough, for this highly
acceptable Present. And, as for my Daughters, They have taken into their
Own Hands the Acknowledgment due from their Gratitude. I am,

  DEAR SIR,
  Your, &c.

  Dec. 17, 1740.


Abstract of a second Letter from the same Gentleman.

  ---No Sentiments which I have here, or in my last, express'd, of the
  sweet Pamela, being more than the bare Truth, which every Man must
  feel, who lends his Ear to the inchanting Prattler, why does the
  Author's Modesty mislead his Judgment, to suspect the Style wants
  Polishing?---No, Sir, there is an Ease, a natural Air,
  a dignify'd Simplicity, and measured Fullness, in it, that,
  resembling Life, outglows it! He has reconciled the Pleasing to
  the Proper. The Thought is every-where exactly cloath'd by the
  Expression: And becomes its Dress as roundly, and as close, as
  Pamela her Country-habit. Remember, tho' she put it on with humble
  Prospect, of descending to the Level of her Purpose, it adorn'd
  her, with such unpresum'd Increase of Loveliness; sat with such
  neat Propriety of Elegant Neglect about her, that it threw out All
  her Charms, with tenfold, and resistless Influence.---And so, dear
  Sir, it will be always found.---When modest Beauty seeks to hide
  itself by casting off the Pride of Ornament, it but displays
  itself without a Covering: And so, becoming more distinguished, by
  its Want of Drapery, grows stronger, from its purpos'd
  Weakness.

[5th, change 3.]

{There were formed by an anonymous Gentleman, the following Objections
to some Passages in the Work.}

1. That the Style ought to be a little raised, at least so soon as
Pamela knows the Gentleman's Love is honourable, and when [7th: "her"]
{his} Diffidence is changed to Ease: And from about the fourth Day after
Marriage, it should be equal to the Rank she is rais'd to, [del. 4th]
{and charged to fill becomingly}.

2. That to avoid the Idea apt to be join'd with the Word 'Squire, the
Gentleman should be styled Sir James; or Sir John, &c. and Lady
Davers in a new Edition might procure for him the Title of a Baronet.

3. That if the sacred Name were seldomer repeated, it would be better;
for that the Wise Man's Advice is, Be not righteous over-much.

4. That the Penance which Pamela suffers from Lady Davers might be
shorten'd: That she is too timorous after owning her Marriage to that
Lady, and ought to have a little more Spirit, and [del. 5th] {get away
sooner out at the Window, or} call her own Servants to protect, and
carry her to her Husband's Appointment.

5. That Females are too apt to be struck with Images of Beauty; and that
the Passage where the Gentleman is said to span the Waist of Pamela
with his Hand, is enough to ruin a Nation of Women by Tight-lacing.

6. That the Word naughty had better be changed to some other, as
Bad, Faulty, Wicked, Vile, Abominable, Scandalous: Which in
most Places would give an Emphasis, for which recourse must otherwise be
had to the innocent Simplicity of the Writer; an Idea not necessary to
the Moral of the Story, nor of Advantage to the Character of the
Heroine.

7. That the Words, p. 305. Foolish Thing that I am, had better be
Foolish that I am. The same Gentleman observes by way of Postscript,
that Jokes are often more severe, and do more Mischief, than more solid
Objections; and would have one or two Passages alter'd, to avoid giving
Occasion for the Supposition of a double Entendre, particularly in two
Places which he mentions, viz. p. 175. and 181.

He is pleased to take notice of several other Things of less Moment,
some of which are merely typographical; and very kindly expresses, on
the Whole, a high Opinion of the Performance, and thinks it may do a
great deal of Good: For all which, as well as for his Objections, the
Editor gives him very sincere Thanks.

Others are of Opinion, That the Scenes in many Places, in the Beginning
especially, are too low; and that the Passions of Lady Davers, in
particular, are carried too high, and above Nature.

And others have intimated, That Pamela ought, for Example sake, to
have discharg'd Mrs. Jewkes from her Service.

These are the most material Objections that have come to hand, all
which are considered in the following [del. 5th] {Extracts from some
of the most beautiful} Letters [del. 5th] {that have been written in
any Language}:

[8th adds change 4]

  The Gentleman's Advice, not to alter Pamela at all, was both
  friendly, and solidly just. I run in, with full Sail, to his
  Anchorage, that the low Scenes are no more out of Nature, than the
  high Passions of proud Lady Davers. Out of Nature, do they say?
  'Tis my Astonishment how Men of Letters can read with such absent
  Attention! They are so far from Out of Nature, They are absolute
  Nature herself! or, if they must be confess'd her Resemblance;
  they are such a Resemblance, at least, as our true Face gives
  our Face in the Looking-glass.

  I wonder indeed, what it is, that the Gentlemen, who talk of Low
  Scenes, wou'd desire should be understood by the Epithet?---Nothing,
  properly speaking, is low, that suits well with the Place it is
  rais'd to.----The Passions of Nature are the same, in the Lord,
  and his Coach-man. All, that makes them seem different consists in
  the Degrees, in the Means, and the Air, whereto or wherewith
  they indulge 'em. If, in painting Distinctions like these, (which
  arise but from the Forms of Men's Manners, drawn from Birth,
  Education, and Custom) a Writer falls short of his Characters,
  there his Scene is a low one, indeed, whatever high Fortune it
  flatter'd. But, to imagine that Persons of Rank are above a Concern
  for what is thought, felt, or acted, by others, of their Species,
  between whom and themselves is no Difference, except such as was
  owing to Accident, is to reduce Human Nature to a Lowness,--too
  low for the Truth of her Frailty.--

  In Pamela, in particular, we owe All to her Lowness. It is to
  the docile Effects of this Lowness of that amiable Girl, in her
  Birth, her Condition, her Hopes, and her Vanities, in every thing,
  in short, but her Virtue,---that her Readers are indebted, for the
  moral Reward, of that Virtue. And if we are to look for the
  Low among the Rest of the Servants, less lovely tho' they are,
  than a Pamela, there is something however, so glowingly painted,
  in the Lines whereby the Author has mark'd their
  Distinctions----Something, so movingly forceful, in the Grief at
  their Parting, and Joy at the happy Return,---Something so
  finely, at once, and so strongly and feelingly, varied, even in
  the smallest and least promising, little Family Incidents! that I
  need only appeal from the Heads, to the Hearts of the Objectors
  themselves, whether these are low Scenes to be censur'd?

  And as for the opposite Extreme they wou'd quarrel with, the
  high-passion'd, and un-tam'd Lady Davers,---I cou'd direct 'em to
  a Dozen or two of Quality Originals, from whom (with Exception
  perhaps of her Wit) one wou'd swear the Author had taken her
  Copy.---What a Sum might these Objectors ensure, to be paid, by the
  Husbands and Sons, of such termagant, hermaphrodite Minds, upon
  their making due Proof, that they were no longer to be found, in the
  Kingdom!

  I know, you are too just to imagine me capable of giving any other
  Opinion than my best-weigh'd and true one. But, because it is fit
  you should have Reasons, in Support of a Judgment that can neither
  deserve nor expect an implicit Reception, I will run over the
  Anonymous Letter I herewith return you; and note with what Lightness
  even Men of good-natur'd Intention fall into Mistakes, by
  Neglect in too hasty Perusals, which their Benevolence wou'd take
  Pleasure in blushing at, when they discover their Weakness, in a
  cooler Revisal.

  The Writer of this Letter is for having the Style rais'd, after
  Pamela's Advance in her Fortune. But surely, This was hasty
  Advice: because, as the Letters are writ to her Parents, it wou'd
  have look'd like forgetting, and, in some sort, insulting, the
  Lowliness of their inferior Condition, to have assum'd a new Air in
  her Language, in Place of retaining a steady Humility. But, here, it
  must not be pass'd unobserv'd, that in her Reports of Conversations
  that follow'd her Marriage, she does, aptly and beautifully,
  heighten her Style, and her Phrases: still returning however to her
  decent Simplicity, in her Addresses to her Father and Mother.

  I am against giving a Gentleman (who has ennobled himself, by
  reforming his Vices, and rewarding the Worth of the Friendless)
  the unnecessary new Toy of a Title. It is all strong in Nature, as
  it stands in the Letters: and I don't see how Greatness, from
  Titles, can add Likeness or Power, to the Passions. So complete a
  Resemblance of Truth stands in need of no borrow'd Pretensions.

  The Only of this Writer's Objections, which, I think, carries
  Weight, is That, which advises some little Contraction of the
  Prayers, and Appeals to the Deity. I say little Contraction: for
  they are nobly and sincerely pathetic. And I say it only in Fear,
  lest, if fansied too long, by the fashionably Averse to the
  Subject, Minds, which most want the purpos'd Impression, might
  hazard the Loss of its Benefit, by passing over those pious
  Reflections, which, if shorter, would catch their Attention.

  Certainly, the Gentleman's Objection against the Persecution that
  Pamela suffers from lady Davers, in respect to the Relation this
  Madwoman bears to the Brother, is the [4th & 5th, change 5.]
  {rashest} of All his Advices! And when he thinks she ought rather to
  have assum'd the Protection of her Servants, he seems unaware of the
  probable Consequence; where there was a Puppy, of Quality, in the
  Case, who had, even without Provocation, drawn his Sword on the poor
  passive PAMELA. Far from bearing a Thought of exciting an abler
  Resentment, to the Danger of a Quarrel with so worthless a Coxcomb,
  how charmingly natural, apprehensive, and generous, is her Silence
  (during the Recital she makes of her Sufferings) with regard to this
  masculine Part of the Insult! as also her Prevention of Mrs.
  Jewkes's less delicate Bluntness, when she was beginning to
  complain of the whelp Lord's Impertinence!

  If I were not afraid of a Pun, I shou'd tell the anonymous
  Letter-writer, that he made a too tight-laced Objection, where he
  quarrels with the spann'd Waist of Pamela. What, in the Name of
  Unshapeliness! cou'd he find, to complain of, in a beautiful Girl of
  Sixteen, who was born out of Germany, and had not, yet, reach'd
  ungraspable Roundness!----These are wonderful Sinkings from
  Purpose, where a Man is considering such mental, and passionate
  Beauties, as this Gentleman profess'd to be touch'd by!

  But, when he goes on, to object against the Word naughty, (as
  apply'd in the Phrase naughty Master) [4th, change 6.] {I grow
  mortified, in Fear for our human Sufficiency, compar'd with our
  Aptness to blunder! For, here, 'tis plain, this Director of
  Another's Discernment is quite blind, Himself, to an Elegance,} one
  wou'd have thought it impossible not to be struck by?---Faulty,
  wicked, abominable, scandalous, (which are the angry Adjectives, he
  prefers to that sweet one) wou'd have carried Marks of her Rage, not
  Affliction--whereas naughty contains, in One single significant
  Petulance, [5th: "a Variety of"] {twenty thousand} inexpressible
  Delicacies!---It insinuates, at once, all the beautiful Struggle,
  between her Contempt of his Purpose, and tender Regard for his
  Person; her Gratitude to Himself and his Family; her Recollection of
  his superior Condition.--There is in the elegant Choice of this
  half-kind, half-peevish, Word, a never-enough to be prais'd
  speaking Picture of the Conflict betwixt her Disdain, and her
  Reverence! [del. 4th] {See, Sir, the Reason I had, for
  apprehending some Danger that the refin'd Generosity in many of the
  most charming of the Sentiments wou'd be lost, upon the too coarse
  Conception of some, for whose Use the Author intended them.}

  It is the same Case again, in foolish Thing that I am! which this
  nice, [del. 4th] {un-nice,} Gentleman wou'd advise you to change,
  into foolish that I am! He does not seem to have tasted the pretty
  Contempt of Herself, the submissive Diminutive, so distant from
  Vanity, yet allayed by the gentle Reluctance in Self-condemnation
  [del. 4th] {;---and the other fine Touches of Nature: which wou'd
  All have been lost, in the grave, sober Sound of his Dutch
  Emendation.}

  [del. 4th]

  {As to his Paragraph in Postscript, I shall say the less of it,
  because the Gentleman's own good Sense seems to confess, by the
  Place he has chosen to rank it in, that it ought to be turn'd out of
  Doors, as too dirty for the rest of his Letter.----} [4th,
  change 7.] In the Occasions {he} is pleas'd to discover for Jokes,
  I either find not, that he has any Signification at all, or {such
  vulgar,} coarse-tasted Allusions to loose low-life Idioms, [ins.]
  that not to understand what {he means,} is both the cleanliest,
  and prudentest Way of confuting {him}.

  And now, Sir, you will easily gather how far I am from thinking it
  needful to change any thing in Pamela. I would not scratch such a
  beautiful Face, for the Indies!

  [del. 8th]

  {You can hardly imagine how it charms me to hear of a Second Edition
  already! but the News of still new upon new ones, will be found no
  Subject of Wonder. As 'tis sure, that no Family is without Sisters,
  or Brothers, or Daughters, or Sons, who can read; or wants
  Fathers, or Mothers, or Friends, who can think; so equally certain
  it is, that the Train to a Parcel of Powder does not run on with
  more natural Tendency, till it sets the whole Heap in a Blaze, than
  that Pamela, inchanting from Family to Family, will overspread all
  the Hearts of the Kingdom.}

  As to the Objection of those warm Friends to Honesty, who are for
  having Pamela dismiss Mrs. Jewkes; there is not One, among All
  these benevolent Complainers, who wou'd not discern himself to have
  been, laudably, in the wrong, were he only to be ask'd this
  plain Question---Whether a Step, both ill-judg'd, and undutiful, had
  not been the Reverse of a PAMELA's Character?---Two or three times
  over, Mr. B---- had inform'd her, that Mrs. Jewkes and Himself
  having been equally involv'd in One Guilt, she must forgive, or
  condemn, Both together. After this, it grew manifest Duty not to
  treat her with Marks of Resentment.---And, as here was a visible
  Necessity to appear not desirous of turning her away, so, in point
  of mere Moral Regard to the bad Woman Herself, it was nobler, to
  retain her, with a Prospect of correcting, in Time, her loose Habit
  of thinking, than, by casting her off, to the licentious Results of
  her Temper, abandon her to Temptations and Danger, which a Virtue
  like PAMELA's cou'd not wish her expos'd to.

[del. 5th]

{The Manner in which this admirable Gentleman gives his Opinion of the
Piece, and runs thro' the principal Characters, is so masterly, that the
Readers of Pamela will be charm'd by it, tho' they should suppose,
that his inimitable Benevolence has over-valu'd the Piece itself.}

  Inspir'd, without doubt, by some Skill, more than human, and
  comprehending in an humble, and seemingly artless, Narration,
  a Force that can tear up the Heart-strings, this Author has prepar'd
  an enamouring Philtre for the Mind, which will excite such a
  Passion for Virtue, as scarce to leave it in the Power of the
  Will to neglect her.

  Longinus, I remember, distinguishing by what Marks we may know the
  Sublime, says, it is chiefly from an Effect that will follow the
  Reading it: a delightfully-adhering Idea, that clings fast to the
  Memory; and from which it is difficult for a Man to disengage his
  Attention.---If this is a Proof of the Sublime, there was never
  Sublimity so lastingly felt, as in PAMELA!

  Not the Charmer's own prattling Idea stuck so close to the Heart of
  her Master, as the Incidents of her Story to the Thoughts of a
  Reader.---The Author transports, and transforms, with a Power more
  extensive than Horace requires, in his POET!---

  Mr. B----, and the Turns of his Passions---and the Softness, yet
  Strength, of their amiable Object---after having given us the most
  masterly Image of Nature, that ever was painted! take Possession of,
  and dwell in, the Memory.

  And there, too, broods the kind and the credulous Parson WILLIAMS's
  Dove, (without serpentine Mixture) hatching Pity and
  Affection, [4th, change 8.] {for an Honesty so sincere, and so
  silly!}

  There too, take their Places All the lower Supports of this
  beautiful Fabrick.---

  I am sometimes transform'd into plain Goodman ANDREWS, and sometimes
  the good Woman, his Wife.

  As for old Mr. LONGMAN, and JONATHAN, the Butler, they are sure of
  me both, in their Turns.

  Now and-then, I am COLBRAND the Swiss: but, as broad as I
  stride, in that Character, I can never escape Mrs. JEWKES: who
  often keeps me awake in the Night---

  Till the Ghost of Lady DAVERS, drawing open the Curtains, scares the
  Scarer, of me, and of PAMELA!---

  And, then, I take Shelter with poor penitent JOHN, and the rest of
  the Men and the Maids, of all whom I may say, with compassionate
  Marcia,

  --------The Youths DIVIDE their Reader.

[5th & 8th, change 9.]

{And this fine Writer adds:}

  I am glad I made War, in my last, upon the Notion of altering the
  Style: for, having read it twice over since then, (and to Audiences,
  where the Tears were applausively eloquent) I could hardly, here
  and there, find a Place, where one Word can be chang'd for a
  better. There are some indeed, where 'twere possible to leave out,
  a few, without making a Breach in the Building. But, in short, the
  Author has put so bewitching a Mixture together, of the Rais'd
  with the Natural, and the Soft with the Strong and the
  Eloquent---thatnever Sentiments were finer, and fuller of Life!
  never any were utter'd so sweetly!---Even in what relates to the
  pious and frequent Addresses to God, I now retract (on these two
  last Revisals) the Consent I half gave, on a former, to the
  anonymous Writer's Proposal, who advis'd the Author to shorten
  those Beauties.----Whoever considers his Pamela with a View to
  find Matter for Censure, is in the Condition of a passionate Lover,
  who breaks in upon his Mistress, without Fear or Wit, with Intent to
  accuse her, and quarrel---He came to her with Pique in his Purpose;
  but his Heart is too hard for his Malice---and he goes away more
  enslav'd, for complaining.


[del. 5th]

{The following delightful Story, so admirably related, will give great
Pleasure to the Reader; and we take the Liberty of inserting it, for
that very Reason.}

[del. 8th]

  {What a never-to-be satisfied Length has this Subject always the
  Power of attracting me into! And yet, before I have done, I must by
  your means tell the Author a Story, which a Judge not so skilful
  in Nature as he is, might be in Danger perhaps of mistaking, for a
  trifling and silly one. I expect it shou'd give him the clearest
  Conviction, in a Case he is subject to question.}

[del. 8th]

  {We have a lively little Boy in the Family, about seven Years
  old---but, alas for him, poor Child! quite unfriended; and born to
  no Prospect. He is the Son of an honest, poor Soldier, by a Wife,
  grave, unmeaning, and innocent. Yet the Boy, (see the Power of
  connubial Simplicity) is so pretty, so genteel, and gay-spirited,
  that we have made him, and design'd him, our own, ever since he
  could totter, and waddle. The wanton Rogue is half Air: and every
  Motion he acts by has a Spring, like Pamela's when she threw down
  the Card-table. All this Quickness, however, is temper'd by a
  good-natur'd Modesty: so that the wildest of his Flights are thought
  rather diverting than troublesome. He is an hourly Foundation for
  Laughter, from the Top of the House to the Parlours: and, to borrow
  an Attribute from the Reverend Mr. Peters, (tho' without any Note
  of his Musick) plays a very good FIDDLE in the Family. I have told
  you the History of this Tom-tit of a Prater, because, ever since
  my first reading of PAMELA, he puts in for a Right to be one of
  her Hearers; and, having got half her Sayings by heart, talks in no
  other Language but hers: and, what really surprises, and has charm'd
  me into a certain Fore-taste of her Influence, he is, at once,
  become fond of his Book; which (before) he cou'd never be brought to
  attend to---that he may read PAMELA, he says, without stopping.
  The first Discovery we made of this Power over so unripe and unfix'd
  an Attention, was, one Evening, when I was reading her Reflections
  at the Pond to some Company. The little rampant Intruder, being
  kept out by the Extent of the Circle, had crept under my Chair, and
  was sitting before me, on the Carpet, with his Head almost touching
  the Book, and his Face bowing down toward the Fire.---He had sat for
  some time in this Posture, with a Stillness, that made us conclude
  him asleep: when, on a sudden, we heard a Succession of
  heart-heaving Sobs; which while he strove to conceal from our
  Notice, his little Sides swell'd, as if they wou'd burst, with the
  throbbing Restraint of his Sorrow. I turn'd his innocent Face, to
  look toward me; but his Eyes were quite lost, in his Tears: which
  running down from his Cheeks in free Currents, had form'd two
  sincere little Fountains, on that Part of the Carpet he hung over.
  All the Ladies in Company were ready to devour him with Kisses: and
  he has, since, become doubly a Favourite---and is perhaps the
  youngest of Pamela's Converts.}

The same [del. 5th] {incomparable} Writer has favour'd us with an
Objection, [del. 5th] {that is more material than any we have
mention'd;} which cannot be better stated nor answer'd, than in his own
[del. 8th] {beautiful} Words; viz.

  An Objection is come into my Thoughts, which I should be glad the
  Author would think proper to obviate in the Front of the Second
  Edition.

  There are Mothers, or Grandmothers, in all Families of affluent
  Fortune, who, tho' they may have none of Lady Davers's
  Insolence, will be apt to feel one of her Fears,---that the
  Example of a Gentleman so amiable as Mr. B--- may be follow'd, by
  the Jackies, their Sons, with too blind and unreflecting a
  Readiness. Nor does the Answer of that Gentleman to his Sister's
  Reproach come quite up to the Point they will rest on. For, tho'
  indeed it is true, all the World wou'd acquit the best Gentleman in
  it, if he married such a Waiting-maid as Pamela, yet, there is
  an ill-discerning Partiality, in Passion, that will overthrow all
  the Force of that Argument: because every belov'd Maid will be
  PAMELA, in a Judgment obscur'd by her Influence.

  And, since the Ground of this Fear will seem solid, I don't know
  how to be easy, till it is shewn (nor ought it to be left to the
  Author's Modesty) that they who consider his Design in that Light
  will be found but short-sighted Observers.

  Request it of him then to suffer it to be told them, that not a
  limited, but general, Excitement to Virtue was the first and great
  End to his Story: And that this Excitement must have been deficient,
  and very imperfectly offer'd, if he had not look'd quite as low as
  he cou'd for his Example: because if there had been any Degree or
  Condition, more remote from the Prospect than that which he had
  chosen to work on, that Degree might have seem'd out of Reach of the
  Hope, which it was his generous Purpose to encourage.---And, so, he
  was under an evident Necessity to find such a Jewel in a
  Cottage: and expos'd, too, as she was, to the severest Distresses
  of Fortune, with Parents unable to support their own Lives, but from
  the daily hard Product of Labour.

  Nor wou'd it have been sufficient to have plac'd her thus low and
  distressful, if he had not also suppos'd her a Servant: and that
  too in some elegant Family; for if she had always remain'd a
  Fellow-cottager with her Father, it must have carried an Air of
  Romantick Improbability to account for her polite Education.

  If she had wanted those Improvements, which she found means to
  acquire in her Service, it wou'd have been very unlikely, that she
  shou'd have succeeded so well; and had destroy'd one great Use
  of the Story, to have allow'd such uncommon Felicity to the Effect
  of mere personal Beauty.---And it had not been judicious to have
  represented her as educated in a superior Condition of Life with the
  proper Accomplishments, before she became reduc'd by Misfortunes,
  and so not a Servant, but rather an Orphan under hopeless
  Distresses---because Opportunities which had made it no Wonder how
  she came to be so winningly qualified, wou'd have lessen'd her Merit
  in being so. And besides, where had then been the purpos'd
  Excitement of Persons in PAMELA's Condition of Life, by an Emulation
  of her Sweetness, Humility, Modesty, Patience, and Industry, to
  attain some faint Hope of arriving, in time, within View of her
  Happiness?----And what a delightful Reformation shou'd we see, in
  all Families, where the Vanity of their Maids took no Turn toward
  Ambition to please, but by such innocent Measures, as PAMELA's!

  As it is clear, then, the Author was under a Necessity to suppose
  her a Servant, he is not to be accountable for mistaken
  Impressions, which the Charms he has given her may happen to make,
  on wrong Heads, or weak Hearts, tho' in Favour of Maids the Reverse
  of her Likeness.

  What is it then (they may say) that the Lowness, and Distance of
  Pamela's Condition from the Gentleman's who married her, proposes
  to teach the Gay World, and the Fortunate?---It is this---By
  Comparison with that infinite Remoteness of her Condition from the
  Reward which her Virtue procur'd her, one great Proof is deriv'd,
  (which is Part of the Moral of PAMELA) that Advantages from
  Birth, and Distinction of Fortune, have no Power at all, when
  consider'd against those from Behaviour, and Temper of Mind:
  because where the Last are not added, all the First will be
  boasted in vain. Whereas she who possesses the Last finds no Want
  of the First, in her Influence.

  In that Light alone let the Ladies of Rank look at
  PAMELA.---Such an alarming Reflection as that will, at the same time
  that it raises the Hope and Ambition of the Humble, correct and
  mortify the Disdain of the Proud. For it will compel them to
  observe, and acknowledge, that 'tis the Turn of their Mind, not
  the Claims of their Quality, by which (and which only) Womens
  Charms can be lasting: And that, while the haughty Expectations,
  inseparable from an elevated Rank, serve but to multiply its
  Complaints and Afflictions, the Condescensions of accomplish'd
  Humility, attracting Pity, Affection, and Reverence, secure an
  hourly Increase of Felicity.---So that the moral Meaning of
  PAMELA's Good-fortune, far from tempting young Gentlemen to marry
  such Maids as are found in their Families, is, by teaching Maids
  to deserve to be Mistresses, to stir up Mistresses to support
  their Distinction.

[del. 4th]

{We shall only add, That it was intended to prefix two neat
Frontispieces to this Edition, (and to present them to the Purchasers
of the first) and one was actually finished for that Purpose; but there
not being Time for the other, from the Demand for the new Impression;
and the Engraving Part of that which was done (tho' no Expence was
spared) having fallen very short of the Spirit of the Passages they were
intended to represent, the Proprietors were advised to lay them aside.
And were the rather induced to do so, from the following Observation of
a most ingenious Gentleman, in a Letter to the Editor. "I am so
jealous, says he, in Behalf of our inward Idea of PAMELA's Person,
that I dread any figur'd Pretence to Resemblance. For it will be pity
to look at an Air, and imagine it Hers, that does not carry some
such elegant Perfection of Amiableness, as will be sure to find place in
the Fancy."}




VERSES, sent to the Bookseller, for the Unknown Author [del. 8th]
{of the beautiful new Piece call'd} PAMELA.

  Blest be thy pow'rful Pen, whoe'er thou art,
  Thou skill'd, great Moulder of the master'd Heart!
  Where hast thou lain conceal'd!---or why thought fit,
  At this dire Period, to unveil thy Wit?
    O! late befriended Isle! had this broad Blaze,
  With earlier Beamings, bless'd our Fathers Days,
  The Pilot Radiance, pointing out the Source,
  Whence public Health derives its [5th: "moral"] {vital} Course,
  Each timely Draught some healing Power had shown,
  Ere gen'ral Gangrene blacken'd, to the Bone.
  But, fest'ring now, beyond all Sense of Pain,
  'Tis hopeless: and the Helper's Hand is vain.
    Sweet Pamela! forever-blooming Maid!
  Thou dear, unliving, yet immortal, Shade!
  Why are thy Virtues scatter'd to the Wind?
  Why are thy Beauties flash'd upon the Blind?
    What, tho' thy flutt'ring Sex might learn, from thee,
  That Merit forms a Rank, above Degree?
  That Pride, too conscious, falls, from ev'ry Claim,
  While humble Sweetness climbs, beyond its Aim?
  What, tho' Religion, smiling from thy Eyes,
  Shews her plain Power, and charms without Disguise?
  What, tho' thy warmly-pleasing moral Scheme
  Gives livelier Rapture, than the Loose can dream?
  What, tho' thou build'st, by thy persuasive Life,
  Maid, Child, Friend, Mistress, Mother, Neighbour, Wife?
  Tho' Taste like thine each Void of Time, can fill,
  Unsunk by Spleen, unquicken'd by Quadrille!
  What, tho' 'tis thine to bless the lengthen'd Hour!
  Give Permanence to Joy, and Use to Pow'r?
  Lend late-felt Blushes to the Vain and Smart?
  And squeeze cramp'd Pity from the Miser's Heart?
  What, tho' 'tis thine to hush the Marriage Breeze,
  Teach Liberty to tire, and Chains to please?
  Thine tho', from Stiffness to divest Restraint,
  And, to the Charmer, reconcile the Saint?
  Tho' Smiles and Tears obey thy moving Skill,
  And Passion's ruffled Empire waits thy Will?
  Tho' thine the fansy'd Fields of flow'ry Wit,
  Thine, Art's whole Pow'r, in Nature's Language writ!
  Thine, to convey strong Thought, with modest Ease,
  And, copying Converse, teach its Style to please?
  Tho' thine each Virtue, that a God cou'd lend?
  Thine, ev'ry Help, that ev'ry Heart, can mend?
  'Tis Thine in vain!----Thou wak'st a dying Land;
  And lift'st departed Hope, with fruitless Hand:
  Death has NO CURE. Thou hast mis-tim'd thy Aim;
  Rome had her GOTHS: and all, beyond, was Shame.
